---
title: Interesting Articles about Ceres
categories: online
tags: space, biology, chemistry, geology
---

Some fun facts about Ceres:

- Frozen Ocean World
- Made of clay with a salty crust
- Rich in organic compounds! Would be great for life... if it weren't so small and cold. :cry: 
- Best Dwarf Planet
- Named after the Goddess of Agriculture (Fact: Cake is better than Death ∴  ⚳ ≻ ♇)
- Largest object in the Asteroid Belt, and the first to be discovered (1801)
  - Discovered based on [now debunked theory about the harmonic spacing of planets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phaeton_(hypothetical_planet))
- In fact, Ceres was discovered before Neptune. 
- Cryovolcano! Ceres has one. Earth has a mantle of barely frozen silicates that sometimes bursts up through volcanoes as **lava**. Ceres has the same thing, except its mantle is made of barely frozen muddy salt water, which erupts through Ahuna Mons as **cryolava** (which is really just a cooler way to say brine)
- The volcano, along with sublimated surface ice, give Ceres a thin atmosphere of mist. But Ceres is sadly too small to hold onto the gas, so the atmosphere is transient and localized.

### [Bright Spots on Ceres](https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.php?feature=7722)

2015 Dawn mission explored Ceres and let people learn a lot about it.

Ceres' 57-mile-wide (92-kilometer-wide) Occator Crater full of bright spots.
Thought they were Sodium Carbonate.
But Dawn tells us they are saltwater.

> On Ceres' surface, salts bearing water quickly dehydrate, within hundreds of years. But Dawn's measurements show they still have water, so the fluids must have reached the surface very recently. This is evidence both for the presence of liquid below the region of Occator Crater and ongoing transfer of material from the deep interior to the surface.

Also

> interesting conical hills reminiscent of Earth's pingos - small ice mountains in polar regions formed by frozen pressurized groundwater

### Rich in Carbon Compounds

> When Dawn used the last of a key fuel, hydrazine, for a system that controls its orientation, it was neither able to point to Earth for communications nor to point its solar arrays at the Sun to produce electrical power. Because Ceres was found to have organic materials on its surface and liquid below the surface, planetary protection rules required Dawn to be placed in a long-duration orbit that will prevent it from impacting the dwarf planet for decades.

### [Rich in Water](https://www.space.com/28776-nasa-dawn-ceres-russell-interview.html)

Chris Russel says it's 25% water, and objects like Ceres may be where Earth got its water from.

> You can think of the Earth as mainly being built out of Vestas. Vesta is a rocky exterior and an iron core; that's what we found when we got there, and that's what we expected. And the Earth is mainly an iron core with rock around it. However, we have water [on Earth]. Where did the water come from?

> The Rosetta mission didn't find the right water out there on Comet 67 C-G [67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko]; they found the wrong isotopic ratios. So the water isn't coming from a large distance. It's probably coming from the inner solar system, and Ceres is a body with a lot of water on it. One quarter of the mass of Ceres is water, and three quarters is rock. If we had just a few Ceres-type bodies colliding with the Earth, we can explain where the water came from.

Perhaps it was from Theia, the planet that collided with Earth to form the moon.

The argument goes:

- Most of earths water [came from asteroids, not comets](https://www.space.com/27969-earth-water-from-asteroids-not-comets.html)
- The isotopes of water are similar to the isotopes from [Carbonaceous chondrite](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019NatAs...3..736B/abstract) asteroids
- [Above link](Earth grew through collisions with Moon-sized to Mars-sized planetary embryos from the inner Solar System, but it also accreted material from greater heliocentric distances1,2, including carbonaceous chondrite-like bodies, the likely source of Earth’s water and highly volatile species3,4) also argues that water came from late stage impacts.
- The frost line during the solar systems formation was in the asteroid belt, near where Ceres now is. Closer than Ceres, ice couldn't really form and the asteroid belt is dry. [link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frost_line_(astrophysics))



## Maybe the Moon and Earth used to be a donut

[Synestia, it was called](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synestia)



## CRazy Idea? Can we ram Ceres into Mars?

Ignore the fact that this is physically impossible, yeah. 

Earth has 5.97237×10^24 kg
6.4171×10^23 kg (1/10th of earth)
Ceres is 9.38×10^20 kg

So yeah, forget about that plan.






