---
title: "Notes on heat and radation - hotplates."
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - online
tags:
  - physics
  - fun
---

# Notes on radiation, energy use and heat transfer.

## details of the hotplate

Imagine we have a magical griddle the same size and power as one you can buy for your countertop.

Let's say this griddle runs at 1500 watts and has an cooking surface of around 21 inches by 10 inches. This gives us a power output of about 11000 Watts per square meter.

Magically, this hotplate always has the same power output, typically heating the surroundings, and the bottom doesn't absorb or transmit any heat.

## Equilibrium radiation.

Great. Magical cooking surface. How bright would this thing get if we stuck it in a vaccuum?

The Joules of radiation emitted from an object are given by 

$$\textcolor{black}{J_e} = \textcolor{brown}{M_e}+ \textcolor{red}{J_{e,r}} + \textcolor{green}{J_{e,tr}}$$

$$\textcolor{black}{Radiosity} = \textcolor{brown}{Radiant Emmitance}+ \textcolor{red}{Reflected Radiosity} + \textcolor{green}{Transmitted Radiosity}$$

If we make a few more assumptions:

- The hotplate is opaque, so $$\textcolor{green}{J_{e,tr}} = 0$$
- The hotplate doesn't have any other radiation sources shining on it, so $$\textcolor{red}{J_{e,r}} = 0$$
- The hotplate is a gray body, so that $$\textcolor{blue}{M_e}$$ is determined by the [Stefan Boltzmann Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stefan%E2%80%93Boltzmann_law)

Then the above simiplifies to:

If we have an opaque diffuse gray body with no radiation shining on it, then Stefan-Boltzmann Law says:

$$\textcolor{black}{J_e} = \textcolor{goldenrod}{M_e} = \textcolor{blue}{\varepsilon} \textcolor{green}{\sigma}  \textcolor{red}{T^4}$$

$$\textcolor{black}{Radiosity} = \textcolor{goldenrod}{\text{Radiant Emittance}} = \textcolor{blue}{\text{Emissivity}} \cdot \textcolor{green}{\text{Stefan's constant}} \cdot \textcolor{red}{\text{Temperature}^4}$$

Do a wee bit of alegebra to the Stefan-Boltzmann Law, and we find that the temperature $\color{red} T$ needed to emit $\color{goldenrod} M_e$ watts per square meter of radiation is 

$$\textcolor{red}{T} = \sqrt[4]{\frac{\textcolor{goldenrod}{M_e}}{\textcolor{blue}{\varepsilon} \textcolor{green}{\sigma}}}$$

$$\textcolor{red}{\text{Temperature}} = \sqrt[4]{\frac{\textcolor{goldenrod}{\text{Radiant Emittance}}}{\textcolor{blue}{\text{emissivity}}  \cdot \textcolor{green}{\text{Stefan's constant}}}}$$

Stefan's constant is $$\textcolor{green}{\sigma\approx\frac{5.670}{10^{8}}\frac{W}{m^{2}K^{4}}}$$, 
and the griddle is emitting $$\textcolor{goldenrod}{11000 \frac{W}{m^2}}$$ or energy. 
So then <span style="color:red">how hot</span> does our magical griddle need to get before it <span style="color:goldenrod">emits its entire power output</span> as radiation?

$$\textcolor{red}{T} = \textcolor{green}{100} \sqrt[4]{\frac{\textcolor{goldenrod}{11000}}{\textcolor{blue}{\varepsilon} \textcolor{green}{5.670}}}K$$

- If the object is a blackbody with $$\color{blue} \varepsilon = 1$$, then $$ \color{red} T \approx 670 K \approx 400 \degree C$$
- If graybody with $$\color{blue} \varepsilon = 0.59$$, [similar to stainless steel](https://www.thermoworks.com/emissivity-table), then $$\color{red} T \approx 760 K \approx 490 \degree C$$
- If graybody with $$\color{blue} \varepsilon = 0.05$$, [similar to polished copper](https://www.thermoworks.com/emissivity-table), then $$\color{red} T \approx 1400 K \approx 1100 \degree C$$

Comparing that to the [information on this page about blacksmithing](https://www.giangrandi.org/optics/blackbody/blackbody.shtml), and various other [charts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black-body_radiation), our magical griddle could range anywhere from not visibly glowing to glowing orange hot, depending on the object's emmisivity properties.

See also [this chart about emissivity](https://assets.omega.com/pdf/tables_and_graphs/emissivity-table.pdf).

And I'm pretty sure the emissivity shouldn't affect the color of the radiosity because [Wien's law applies to any object in thermodyanamic equilibrium](https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/87294/wiens-displacement-law-for-real-bodies).

### Interesting sidenote: weird cube made of gold and fish

A [Leslie cube](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leslie_cube) is used to measure an objects emissivity.

- The cube is made of solid metal with a hollow interior.
- The inside is filled with hot water to make the whol thing some specific temperature
- The sides are coated with various materials. Originally:
    - Gold
    - silver
    - copper
    - isinglass, which is a natural glue made of dried fish swim bladder.

The emissivity of the metals is low and of the isinglue is high, so you can use that to calibrate a thermal camera and compare it to other objects' emissivities. 

Dutch has a leslie cube in orbit call FUNcube-1.





## The Coldplate

Now suppose we have a similar plate which magically *removes* heat. It's the same size of around 21 inches by 10 inches. and it removes 1500 watts of heat energy, shunting it magically into another dimension. (It will shut off if the surroundings drop below some very low temperature.) How dangerous is this thing? 

### How fast could it freeze a layer of body-temperature water?

The hotplate removes 11000 Joules per square meter per second. 

If we have a layer of water 1cm thick covering a square-meter cryoplate, 
then that would be $$100*100*1 = 10,000$$ cubic centimeters of water, or 10 L.
This is also 10 kg of water.

Body temperature is $$37\degree C$$,
freezing temp is $$0 \degree C$$, and
We need to remove roughly 4184 Joules of energy to bring a liter of water down one degree C. *(Based on the calorie to joule conversion ratio, actual, the specific heat varis as the temp changes, but whatevs.)*

(Some angry person wrote a wikipedia article about how [not all calories are the same](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_calorie_is_a_calorie)). Surprised that article hasn't been deleted given the volume of [citation needed]s. Ah well, that's the nature of wikipedia nowadays. It's not written by geeks obsessed with technical accuracy. It's written by morons with a chip on their shoulder.)

Combine these to get that we need to remove $$10L \cdot 4184 \frac{J}{L} = 41840 J$$ to reduce the temperature of our water by 1 Kelvin.
And then our cryogriddle when operational is cooling the water at  a rate of 
$$\frac{11000 J}{1 s} = \frac{11000}{1}\frac{J}{s} \cdot \frac{1}{41840}\frac{K}{J} = 0.26 \frac{K}{s}$$

Which makes sense, I guess. A griddle taking 4 seconds to heat a centimeter of water by 1 degree seems in line with cooking intuition. And this is just the opposite of that.
This means it would take about 140 seconds to get the water to freezing temps.
(Because we need to remove a total of $$41840 \cdot 37 J = 1,548,080 J$$, and can remove 11k J per second.)

If the water starts at room temperature (22C) then we need only wait about 84 seconds for this step.

Then Water releases 334 kJ/kg of energy when it freezes, and we need to overcome that x10. 
Removing a total of 3,340,000 additional Joules of energy 
will take about 304 seconds.

And of course, thinner layers will chill and freeze proportionally quickly. A mm layer of water will  take 14 seconds to chill and 30 seconds to freeze after that. 

### Danger if you sit on it?

Let's say a human is 80 kG.
Only some of that is actually water, but for simplicity, let's assume that we have 80 L of water here.

To induce mild hypothermia, lower body 2 degrees to 35 C.
This requires us to remove $$4184 \cdot 2 \cdot 80 = 669440$$ Joules. 
This would take 1 minute if you are exposed to a full square meter of crygriddle surface.




