---
title: Thanksgiving and the Pequot massacre
categories: online
tags:
  - history
---

Saw somebody online claim thanksgiving had a white supremacist origin.
I thought "wait, isn't Edward Winslow's account of Thanksgiving a rare example of anti-racist harmony is an otherwise brutal racist history?"

So I skim the Thanksgiving page on wikipedia. Turns out there's multiple competing events laying claim to "the first" thanksgiving. 
But more relevant to the internet claim: wikipedia cites some random blogspam about how Thanksgiving is actually a celebration of the slaughter of natives. 
Of course the citation links for that post are broken, but they work well enough for me to find the source of their quotes.

A compilation of letters titled "The Mayflower Papers". Interesting read.
The specific letter is from William Bradford, "ANNO DOMINI 1637", which describes a brutal slaughter of a Pequot village.

The short version of events goes like this, according to Bradford:

- The Pequot had a history of violent conflict with the Narragansett
- Pequot raiders killed twenty "English" farmers.
- The Pequot tried to broker peace by asking the Narragansett  to join them in their conflict with the English.
- The Narragansett say "nah, screw you guys", and team up with the English to raze a pequot town, killing the people who escaped.


> They approached the same with
great silence, and surrounded it both with English and Indians,
that they might not break out; and so assaulted them with
great courage, shooting amongst them, and entered the fort
with all speed. And those that first entered found sharp
resistance from the enemy, who both shot at and grappled
with them; others ran into their houses, and brought out fire,
and set them on fire, which soon took in their mats, and,
standing close together, with the wind, all was quickly on a
flame, and thereby more were burnt to death than was
otherwise slain; it burnt their bowstrings, and made them
unserviceable. Those that escaped the fire were slain with the
sword; some hewed to pieces, others run through with their
rapiers, so as they were quickly dispatched, and very few
escaped.  
> 
> It was conceived they thus destroyed about 400 at this time. It
was a fearful sight to see them thus frying in the fire, and the
streams of blood quenching the same, and horrible was the
stink and scent thereof; but the victory seemed a sweet
sacrifice,2 and they gave the praise thereof to God, who had
wrought so wonderfully for them, thus to enclose their enemies
in their hands, and give them so speedy a victory over so
proud and insulting an enemy.
> 
> The Narragansett Indians, all this while, stood round about, but
aloof from all danger, and left the whole execution to the
English, except it were the stopping of any that broke away,
insulting over their enemies in this their ruin and misery, when
they saw them dancing in the flames, calling them by a word
in their own language, signifying, “Oh brave Pequots!” which
they used familiarly among themselves in their own praise, in
songs of triumph after their victories.

- There's a subsequent conflict with the suvivors of the massacre
- The Pequot leader escapes but is captured by the Mohawks and beheaded
- Other Pequot survivors become Narragansett or Mohegan slaves. 
- Although the event featured cooperation between English and Narragansett, it soured relations between the two.
    - Bradford claims it is because not all of the Pequot captives were given to the Narragansett. Unca, the leader of the Mohegans (and ally of the English), was cousin of the Pequot leader. Thus the Narragansett were robbed of a complete victory over their enemies. 
    - Accounts by other people say that the Narragansett were disgusted by the brutal behavior of the English during the battle, and that the English were fighting in such a mindlessly savage way that several dozen Narragansett were injured by the English in the chaos.


So horrific? Absolutely.   
White-supremacist? Probably not.   
The origin of modern Thanksgiving traditions? Not in the slightest.


---

Sidenote: the Mayflower Papers also contains a letter from Edward Winslow, in which he describes a visit with his friend Massasoit, who called him "Winsnow."

> one told him
that his friends the English were come to see him. Having
understanding left, but his sight was wholly gone; he asked,
“Who was come?”
They told him, “Winsnow.” For they cannot pronounce the
letter l
, but ordinarily n in the place thereof.  
He desired to speak with me. When I came to him and they
told him of it; he put forth his hand to me, which I took.
Then he said twice, though very inwardly, Keen Winsnow? 
which is to say, “Art thou Winslow?”  
I answered, Ahhe; that
is, “Yes.”  
Then he doubled these words, Malta neen
wonckanet namen Winsnow! that is to say, “Oh Winslow, I
shall never see thee again.”

TODO: Read the rest of Mayflower Papers. Reading the intro matches up with my pre-existing impression of Thanksgiving as a brief respite of peace.

> If the true story of the Pilgrims was just getting started by the
First Thanksgiving, there was, nonetheless, a culminating event
that brought an abrupt and bloody end to what had been a
remarkable half-century of peace in Plymouth Colony: the
devastating fourteen-month conflagration known as King Philip’s
War. 
... With King Philip’s War, the
story of the Pilgrims becomes something altogether different
from the reassuring tale of multicultural cooperation taught in
elementary school. Rather than being an exception to the long
and tragic history of European-Native relations in the United
States, the history of Plymouth Colony is very much in what
William Carlos Williams called “the American Grain.”

> Fifty-six years after the sailing of the Mayflower, Benjamin
Church (a grandson of one of the original Pilgrims) had
witnessed the blood-drenched and terrifying collapse of his
forefathers’ way of life. He had also seen the unsettling
emergence of a new combative order that would become, in a
little more than a century, the United States


