---
title: Griddy and electricity in Texas
categories: online
tags:
  - electricity
  - markets
---

- Griddy is company in Texas that charges flat fee for access to wholesale electricity.
- on average cheaper but exposes buyer to volatility of electricity prices
- Texas had power shortages
- Griddy tells customers to subscribe to a hedged electricity plan before the upcoming storm
- Texas PUCT says increase electricity spot prices to incentivize people to join the power grid.
- But since some consumers buying wholesale instead of monthly electricity pacakges, directly exposed to this price increase from Texas (griddly didn't profit from this. They just get the same flat fee.)
- sad interaction between two different market systems?
- On one hand, they chose to buy wholesale and didn't heed the warnings to get a subscription before the extreme storm. So let adults make their own decisions.
- On the other hand, I've misunderstand the terms of agreements before. It's never driven me into bankrupcty from electricty price controls. But it's very sad to hear of someone exposed to this kind of thing.
- Can we model the tail risks resulting from stochastic errors?
    - Like, gov regulation could prevent griddly-style deals. This would cause harm to those who benefit from wholesale electricity, but help those who are dumdums and ignore all the warnings
    - If stupidity is idosyncratic, can be viewed as a sort of insurance program.
    - Hurt everybody by preventing them from engaging in these kinds of deals, but protect against self-own induced tail risks?


[link](https://www.griddy.com/post/griddy-update-why-energy-prices-were-sky-high-this-week)




