---
title: color spaces
categories: online
tags:
  - color
  - art
---

Short version:
- RGB values do not linearly coorespond to light intensity
- Our eyes respond more strongly to green light.
- These two factors combined means that programming colors is hard.

---

## SI light measurements

The 7 SI base units are the second, the meter, the kilogram, the ampere, the Kelvin, the mole, and the candela.
The first 5 of those are physical phenomena, and are now defined in terms of physical constants.
The mole is just a specific number.
But candela, the unit for luminous intensity, is a measurement of *subjective human experience.* 

If we want to talk about the *energy* of light, we use [radiometry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiometry), which is measured in units of Watts and Joules and so forth.

If we want to talk about the percieved *brightness* of light, we use [photometry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photometry_(optics)), which is measured in units of candela.
To get photometric quantities, each photon's energy needs to be weighted by a [standard luminance function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luminosity_function), which is a model of how much an average human retina responds to each wavelength of light.

Any advanced alien civilization would develop units equivalent to the second, meter, kilogram, ampere, and Kelvin.  But candela is a human thing. Imagine meeting our neighbors from the stars, and learning that they consider "the comfort of a back massage" to be a fundamental unit of measurement comparable to time or distance. That's how the candela do.

### Simplified glossary of light measurements

Radiant
: The energy of light

Luminous
: The percieved brightness of light

Flux
: The rate of light going through some surface. Radiant unit is *watts*, Luminous unit is *lumens*.

Intensity
: How much light is coming from a point source? Measured by flux per [steradian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steradian). Radiant unit is *watts per steradian*, Luminous unit is *candelas = lumens per steradian*. An unobstructed candle flame has a luminous intensity of about 1 candela, hence the name.

Lumin**ance** and Radi**ance**
: How bright is a surface? Intensity per square meter. Luminance is useful for comparing computer monitors. Radiance is useful for talking about the [properties of really hot things](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black-body_radiation).

**I**llumin**ance** and **I**rradi**ance**
: How brightly is a surface being *shined on*? Flux per square meter. The sun illuminates the earth, which makes it easy to see. The sun irradiates the earth, which keeps us warm. Winter is darker because of decreased illuminance. Winter is colder because of decreased irradiance. Radiant unit is *watt per square meter*, luminous unit is *lux*.

Luminous efficacy
: How good is a light source at actually lighting up a room? Luminous flux divided by radiant flux. Unit is *lumens per watt*. The best *possible* luminous efficacy of 683 lm/W comes from a pure green light source. An incandescent bulb only has something like 15 lm/W because most of the light is being emitted in infrared colors which humans can't even see.


<aside markdown="block">
Interesting sidenote about consumer laser beams: 
According to [this article about laser sights for target shooting](https://www.guns.com/news/2017/06/05/an-intimate-look-at-lasers-and-why-shooters-are-choosing-green-beams),
the FDA restricts laser pointers to 5 milliwatts for safety reasons.
Thus to maximize the visibility of your 5 mW beam, you want a green laser with a wavelength near the peak of the luminance curve, right?

It's not that simple. 
[Red lasers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruby_laser) are cheap and efficient. 
Green lasers are made by creating an infrared laser and then [increasing the frequency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second-harmonic_generation).
This process generates lots of waste heat.
Thus while the beam of a green laser has near maximum luminous efficacy, 
the device as a whole has a really low efficacy because of all the waste heat being radiated away in the infrared ranges.
</aside>


---

## RGB and flux

[Linear combinations of RGB values don't yield equal brightness.](https://stackoverflow.com/a/29321264).
A [gamma correction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_correction) is performed to convert from RGB values to linear RGB intensities. This let's us use a small linear range of values to encode a large range of percieved  levels.

To simplify a bit, an RGB value is the signal sent to the monitor, and flux is the number of photons coming out of the led. And the are related by:

$$flux \propto signal^{2.2}$$

So if we have two red pixels, and the RGB code says the second pixel is twice as bright, then
about 4.6 times as many photons will come out of the second pixel.
This is because $2^{.2} \approx 4.6$

<!--$$100^{2.2} = (50*2)^{2.2} = (50*2)^{2.2} \cdot 2^{2.2} \approx (50*2)^{2.2} \cdot 4.6$$-->

The above formula is an approximation. The actual formulas for converting between the sRGB signal (normalized to the range 0-1) and the linear RGB flux are 

$$
signal = \gamma(flux) \propto \begin{cases}
			12.92\times flux, & \text{if } flux \leq 0.0031308 \\
            1.055 \times flux^{1/2.4}- 0.055, & \text{otherwise}
		 \end{cases}
$$

$$
flux \propto \gamma^{-1}(signal) = \begin{cases}
			{signal \over 12.92}, & \text{if } signal \leq 0.04045 \\
            \left(signal + 0.055 \over 1.055\right)^{2.4}, & \text{otherwise}
		 \end{cases}
$$

<!--This is all proportional because different devices have different baseline levels of brightness.--> 
Details are on [this page.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SRGB)

### Example: let's mix red and blue:

The effective exponent varies along the range of colors. 2.4 is a good approx for sRGB near maximum intensity.

$$\color{#FF0000} Red = (256,0,0), flux \propto 256^{2.4}$$
$$\color{#0000FF} Blue = (0,0,256), flux \propto 256^{2.4}$$

A linear average yields

$$\color{#800080} Purple = (128,0,128), flux \propto .38\times 256^{2.4}$$

But this looks darker than the inputs because

$$2 \times 128^{2.4} = 2 \times (\frac{1}{2} 256)^{2.4} = 2 \times (1/2)^{2.4} \times 256^{2.4}  = 2^{-1.4} \times 256^{2.4} $$

Instead of halving each signal, we want to find $\eta$ such that  

$$256^{2.4} = 2 \times \eta^{2.4} $$
$$\eta^{2.4}  = \frac{256^{2.4}}{2}$$
$$\eta  = \left( \frac{256^{2.4}}{2} \right)^{1 \over 2.4} =  \frac{256}{2^{1 \over 2.4}}\approx \frac{256}{1.33} \approx 192$$

Plug this in and we get

$$\color{#FF0000} Red = (256,0,0), flux \propto 256^{2.4}$$
$$\color{#C000C0} Redblue = (192,0,192), flux \propto 256^{2.4} \approx 2\times 192^{2.4}$$
$$\color{#0000FF} Blue = (0,0,256), flux \propto 256^{2.4}$$


### Rainbow time

Do the same for all the primary combinations and we get

$$\color{#FF0000}R\color{#C0C000}Y\color{#00FF00}G\color{#00C0C0}C\color{#0000FF}B\color{#C000C0}V\color{#FF0000}R$$

which seems to have a more even brightness than the linear averages:

$$\color{#FF0000}R\color{#808000}Y\color{#00FF00}G\color{#008080}C\color{#0000FF}B\color{#800080}V\color{#FF0000}R$$

Or compare to the full brightness of each hue, where the intermediate colors are actually sending out more light.
$$\color{#FF0000}R\color{#FFFF00}Y\color{#00FF00}G\color{#00FFFF}C\color{#0000FF}B\color{#FF00FF}V\color{#FF0000}R$$

$$\colorbox{#FF0000}{ }\colorbox{#808000}{ }\colorbox{#00FF00}{ }\colorbox{#008080}{ }\colorbox{#0000FF}{ }\colorbox{#800080}{ }\colorbox{#FF0000}{ }$$
$$\colorbox{#FF0000}{ }\colorbox{#C0C000}{ }\colorbox{#00FF00}{ }\colorbox{#00C0C0}{ }\colorbox{#0000FF}{ }\colorbox{#C000C0}{ }\colorbox{#FF0000}{ }$$
$$\colorbox{#FF0000}{ }\colorbox{#FFFF00}{ }\colorbox{#00FF00}{ }\colorbox{#00FFFF}{ }\colorbox{#0000FF}{ }\colorbox{#FF00FF}{ }\colorbox{#FF0000}{ }$$

Nice!

Incidentally, this is why some color interpolation algorithms give messy dark splotches when trying to fade between two different bright hues.

---

## Adjusting for Color Perception.

But doing a gamma correction to get approximately equal flux still isn't enough to make the colors feel the same brightness.
Notice how pure $\color{#00FF00}GREEN$ looks brighter than pure $\color{#0000FF}BLUE$,
despite the fact that both involve sending a signal of 256 to the pixel.
(Sidenote: html standards refer to $\color{#00FF00}00FF00$ as "lime", and call $\color{#008000}008000$ "green".)

This is because the human eye is not equally sensitive across the entire spectrum. Luminance function!

To get the percieved brightness of a pixel, called the [relative luminance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relative_luminance), we need to take the actual light output of the RGB supixels and weight them by how much our eyes respond to red, green, and blue:

$$Y = 0.2126 \textcolor{red}{R} + 0.7152 \textcolor{lime}{G} + 0.0722 \textcolor{blue}{B}$$

Note: equation is set up so a fully white pixel has a relative luminence of 1.

### Example Going from sRGB to relative luminance

To figure out the relative luminance of $\color{#FF8000}\#FF8000 = (256,128,0)$, we do the following steps:

1. Normalize each subpixel value to a max of 1.  $\color{#FF8000}(1,0.5,0)$
2. Convert from sRGB signal to linear RGB flux, which tells us about the radiation coming out of the pixel. $\color{#FF8000}(\gamma^{-1}(1),\gamma^{-1}(0.5),\gamma^{-1}(0)) \approx (1,0.214,0)$
3. Apply luminance weights to adjust for wonky human color bias. $Y = 0.2126 \times \textcolor{red}{1} + 0.7152 \times \textcolor{lime}{0.214} + 0.0722 \times \textcolor{blue}{0} = .366$

So a pixel colored $\color{#FF8000} (256,128,0)$ will appear roughly 36% as bright as a fully white pixel.

For comparison, a pixel colored $\color{#80FF00} (128,256,0)$ will appear roughly 76% as bright as a fully white pixel. Same total signal. Same amount of radiation, but more perceptual brightness because our eyes are sensitive to green.

I think.

### Some more examples of relative luminance

name | sRGB | appearance | rel. lum.
---|---|:-:|---
pure red| 255,0,0 | $\colorbox{#FF0000}{\color{#FF0000} X }$ |21%
pure green| 0,255,0 | $\colorbox{#00FF00}{\color{#00FF00} X }$ | 72%
blue| 0,0,255 | $\colorbox{#0000FF}{\color{#0000FF} X }$ | 7%
dark red| 158,0,0 | $\colorbox{#9E0000}{\color{#9E0000} X }$ | 7%
dark green| 0,90,0 | $\colorbox{#005A00}{\color{#005A00} X }$ | 7%
mid green| 0,149,0 | $\colorbox{#009500}{\color{#009500} X }$ | 21%
html green| 0,128,0 | $\colorbox{#008000}{\color{#008000} X }$ | 15%


### Is there something wrong with my monitor?

My calculations are fine. In fact, using [this tool](https://www.hsluv.org/), 
it looks like my dark green and red are each one notch too bright.

Weirdly, the dark red and green look the same subjective brightness to me, 
but  the blue looks too bright unless I have flux turned on.
Is my monitor too blue?

If I use flux to set CCT to 6500 K, which is the [standard for defining sRGB illuminants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illuminant_D65), the blue looks too bright. Lowering to around 5000K makes them look balanced. But I know flux is just manually applying a color filter. I don't *think* it's actually messing with my monitor's color responses.



My [monitor's gamma value](https://www.eizoglobal.com/library/basics/lcd_display_gamma/) is 2.2, as it should be. And I would think that an off gamma value would make all the colors respond incorrectly. Well, actually, if the bright end of things is too bright, then that would lead to the pure 256 blue being brighter than the reds and greens. Oh! maybe it's because at the far end, the gamma cooefficient is 2.4, and maybe my monitor applies the simplified version of $signal^{2.2}$ without those extra bits.


I also checked on a Macbook air 2012 model, and the same extra blue brightness can be seen there.


What if we compare things to a lower brightness of blue?

name | sRGB | appearance | rel. lum.
---|---|:-:|---
dark blue| 0,0,128 | $\colorbox{#000080}{\color{#000080} X }$ | 1.545%
ddark red| 77,0,0 | $\colorbox{#4D0000}{\color{#4D0000} X }$ | 7%
ddark green| 0,41,0 | $\colorbox{#002900}{\color{#002900} X }$ | 1.546%

This still looks like the blue is too bright at 6500K

What if we use the naive gamma adjustment of $flux=signal^{2.2}$?

name | sRGB | appearance | rel. lum.
---|---|:-:|---
blue| 0,0,255 | $\colorbox{#0000FF}{\color{#0000FF} X }$ | 7%
dark red| 157,0,0 | $\colorbox{#9D0000}{\color{#9E0000} X }$ | 7%
dark green| 0,90,0 | $\colorbox{#005A00}{\color{#005A00} X }$ | 7%

Pretty much the same

<!--$$G^{2.2} \times 0.7152 = B^{2.2} \times 0.0722$$
$$G  = \left(B^{2.2} \times {0.0722\over 0.7152}\right)^{1/2.2}$$
$$G  = 0.352633$$
$$0.3526\times 256 = 90$$
$$R  = \left(B^{2.2} \times {0.0722\over 0.2126}\right)^{1/2.2}$$
$$R  = 0.612077$$
$$0.6121\times 256 = 157$$-->

[Specification for sRGB](https://www.w3.org/Graphics/Color/sRGB)
The coefficients in the Colorimetric Definitions section seem to match the ones [on wikipedia ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SRGB).
Oh wait, but that do is obselete. IEC 61966-2-1 is the new standard. Maybe the coefficients have changed?
Pdf with info [here](http://www.color.org/srgb04.xalter).
Contains matrices for adapting to D65 and D50.
No. The numbers are right, as you can see in [this preview](https://www.sis.se/api/document/preview/562720/) of the updated standard.

Coef for linear RGB to D50 is

$$Y_{D50} \approx .2224 R + .7169 G + .0606 B$$

Applying this formula to calculate RGB equally bright gives:

<!--
Need linearGreen to be .08453 of linear Blue.
Need linearRed to be .27248 of linearBlue.
apply \gamme^{-1} to get R=.558727 G=.321854
$$.7169 lG = .0606 lB$$
$$ lG = .0606 / .7169 lB = .8453 lB$$
$$G^{2.2} \times 0.7152 = B^{2.2} \times 0.0722$$
$$G  = \left(B^{2.2} \times {0.0722\over 0.7152}\right)^{1/2.2}$$
$$G  = 0.352633$$
$$0.3526\times 256 = 90$$
$$R  = \left(B^{2.2} \times {0.0722\over 0.2126}\right)^{1/2.2}$$
$$R  = 0.612077$$
$$0.6121\times 256 = 157$$-->


name | RGB,D50 | appearance 
---|---|:-:
blue| 0,0,255 | $\colorbox{#0000FF}{\color{#0000FF} X }$ 
dark red| 142,0,0 | $\colorbox{#8e0000}{\color{#8e0000} X }$ 
dark green| 0,82,0 | $\colorbox{#005200}{\color{#005200} X }$ 

That's even worse. My monitor is definitely not calibrated to D50.




Okay, and based on [wiki luma page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luma_(video)),
there's also the Rec 601 standard for digital video transmission. Maybe my monitor is mistakenly calibrated to that?

$$Y^\prime_{601} = .229 R' + 0.587 G' + 0.114 B'$$

name | RGB | appearance 
---|---|:-:
blue| 0,0,255 | $\colorbox{#0000FF}{\color{#0000FF} X }$ 
dark red| 187,0,0 | $\colorbox{#BB0000}{\color{#BB0000} X }$ 
dark green| 0,102,0 | $\colorbox{#006600}{\color{#006600} X }$ 

Huh. Those look... pretty equal to me. The above formula is meant to be an approximation applied to the gamma compressed signal to get luminance. But when I apply it to the linear RGB and then gamma compress I get good results. Implementation error?

Wiki has this to say:

    The change in the luma coefficients is to provide the "theoretically correct" coefficients that reflect the corresponding standard chromaticities ('colors') of the primaries red, green, and blue. However, there is some controversy regarding this decision.[4] The difference in luma coefficients requires that component signals must be converted between Rec. 601 and Rec. 709 to provide accurate colors. In consumer equipment, the matrix required to perform this conversion may be omitted (to reduce cost), resulting in inaccurate color.

    As well, the Rec. 709 luma coefficients may not necessarily provide better performance. Because of the difference between luma and relative luminance, luma does not exactly represent the luminance in an image. As a result, errors in chroma can affect luminance. Luma alone does not perfectly represent luminance; accurate luminance requires both accurate luma and chroma. Hence, errors in chroma "bleed" into the luminance of an image.

Maybe that's what's happening.

Here's a [complaint](http://poynton.ca/papers/SMPTE_98_YYZ_Luma/index.html) about correcting the coefficients causing problems.
[Explanation of 90s video standards.](http://poynton.ca/PDFs/Mag_of_nonconst_luminance.pdf)
[Luma transforms.](http://poynton.ca/PDFs/Transforms_among_luma_coeff.pdf)

---

### Nifty doodad showing color responses

[I found this is the menus of f.lux.](https://fluxometer.com/rainbow/)

Choose a device and it will give an estimate of the spectrograph.

Woah! It has graphs for the color senstivity of plants and rodents as well.

It's from f.lux, so take with grain of salt, but according to them, I am justified in my suspcion that monitors are too blue.

[Candle is fun](https://fluxometer.com/rainbow/#!id=lights/candle). The graph shows how its mostly infrared.

By default, they're using an intensity modifier they're calling "melanopic", meaning that they're weighting by the effects on circadian rythms?
Switch to photopic to see standard human eye sensitivity.

Compare [D65](https://fluxometer.com/rainbow/#!id=Standard%20Illuminants/D65&action=CIE1924Photopic) to [my laptop screen.](https://fluxometer.com/rainbow/#!id=Macbook%20Air%202012/6500K-MacbookAir2012&action=CIE1924Photopic)
I feel validated in my suspicion that my monitor is too blue.





### Why screens are weirdly blue.

Ah, interesting. This [old link](https://web.archive.org/web/20151024054537/http://www.xrite.com/ezcolor/support/kb3349) claims that screens are calibrated to be more blue so that the image on screen better resembles the image on photo paper. 
And the white point of photo paper is bluish.
Paper uses D50, screen uses D65

[This page](https://www.waveformlighting.com/color-matching/what-is-d50-for-graphic-arts-printing) has comparisons of the spectrographs of D65 vs D50
D65 is monitor standard, like noon daylight. Blue green biased because of bright blue sky.
D50 is warm sunlight, less blue, more balanced greens and reds. [Morning or evening](https://www.xrite.com/service-support/understanding_illuminants).
[.](https://www.waveformlighting.com/color-matching/what-is-d65-and-what-is-it-used-for)
.

Funnily enough, the Planck constant was more accurately measured after these standards were defined. So D50 is similar to CCT 5003K, and D65 6504K

<!--

To get green same rellum as dark blue:
$$ G = \gamma \left(\frac{.0722}{.7152} \gamma^{-1}(B)\right)$$
$$ G = \gamma \left(\frac{.0722}{.7152} .214\right) \approx .158454$$
And $0.1585*256 \approx 41 = 29_{16}$
$$ B = \gamma \left(\frac{.0722}{.2126} .214\right) \approx .2989$$
And $0.2989*256 \approx 77 = 4D_{16}$

To get the green and red the same relative luminence of the blue, we need 

$$.7152 \gamma^{-1}(G) = .0722 \gamma^{-1}(B)$$
$$ G = \gamma \left(\frac{.0722}{.7152} \gamma^{-1}(B)\right)$$
$$ G = \gamma \left(\frac{.0722}{.7152} \gamma^{-1}(1)\right)$$
$$ G = \gamma \left(\frac{.0722}{.7152} \right) = 0.3508$$
And $0.3508*256 \approx 90 = 5A_{16}$

To find an equivalent R
$$R = \gamma \left(\frac{.0722}{.2126} \right) \approx 0.6177$$
And $0.6177*256 \approx 158 = 9E_{16}$

To get green equally as bright as red
$$G = \gamma \left(\frac{.2126}{.7152} \right) \approx 0.581393$$
And $0.5814*256 \approx 149 = 95_{16}$
-->



[Information on sRGB history.](https://ninedegreesbelow.com/photography/srgb-history.html)

[Archived original site](http://web.archive.org/web/20021207231041/http://www.srgb.com/usingsrgb.html)

---

## Human color space encoding.

Because of the weird conversions between the energy and perception of light, 
there are attempts to create [color spaces which approximate human vision](https://programmingdesignsystems.com/color/perceptually-uniform-color-spaces/). ([fun interactive color spaces](https://programmingdesignsystems.com/color/color-models-and-color-spaces/index.html))

The most commonly used are designed by [the CIE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Commission_on_Illumination).

[CIEXYZ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CIE_1931_color_space) has 3 axes
- A Y axis representing luminance as calculated above
- A Z axis, which is almost, but not quite, bluishness
- An X axis which mumble mumble mumble

[CIELAB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CIELAB_color_space) breaks colors down into:
- An $L^*$ axis representing lightness, a transformation of $Y$
- An $a^*$ axis where negative values are greenish, and positive reddish
- A $b^*$ axis where negative values are bluish, and positive yellowish


There's also [CIELUV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CIELUV), which is very close to CIELAB, but uses a slightly different transformation at some stage. It's a bit over my head.

CIELCh is the cylindrical representation of CIELUV or CIELAB, where C is chroma, meaning color intensity, and h is the degree of the hue. Apparently, this  [may be implemented](https://lea.verou.me/2020/04/lch-colors-in-css-what-why-and-how/) in css standards. [Color picker.](https://css.land/lch/)

[HSLuv](https://www.hsluv.org/) does an adjustment to CIELCh to normalize the chroma range.
[.](https://www.boronine.com/2012/03/26/Color-Spaces-for-Human-Beings/). Gets the same resulting dark RG as me. Also looks darker than the pure blue.


CIECAM02-UCS and J*Ch are another set of perceptually uniform color spaces. Here's a [color picker.](http://bl.ocks.org/connorgr/0a299fe77d5c7feccd22e02f2ac5d69b)
---
---



The slug, a unit associated with imperial and US customary systems, is a mass that accelerates by 1 ft/s2 when a force of one pound (lbf) is exerted on it.[37]

---

## ICC profiles

These define how the mintor renders colors and can be changed on most operating systems.

Lindbloom has some matrices [here](http://www.brucelindbloom.com/index.html?Eqn_RGB_XYZ_Matrix.html)
and [here](http://www.brucelindbloom.com/index.html?Eqn_RGB_XYZ_Matrix.html)

--- 

[HCL color space wizard](https://hclwizard.org/)

[perceptually uniform color maps](http://www.fabiocrameri.ch/colourmaps.php)


