---
title: fatihapril26
categories: class
tags:
  - class
---

Monte carlo integration overused

fatih uniform sequence stochastic optimization book

Stochastic Global Optimization

Developments in hasman sequences


Fatih ch 21 global optimization



Bob Hall
: There is nothing you can do with Monte Carlo that you can't do better with a different technique.


Acemoglu:
17 working papers coming out of grad school, got them all published, finish phd in 4 years.


Woman usually produce twice as many antibodies in response. IMmune system coded on X chromosome?



--

positive correlation between consuption of nonrich and higher top income and consumption exposure

benchmark consumption hypothesis




In ita;y, not inequality increase between p90 and p50. But p10 tanked

Informal sector?




Bank of Italy Survery on Household Income and Wealth SHIW



champlain manmkiw hand to mouth consumption

Consumption can change from leisure shock or consumption shock etc.
Getting older, health is declining, etc. affects income and cosumption
because consumption and leisure are non-seperable.




Cochrane 1991 Jep using proxies for income




Reduced form econometrics

Proxy consumption using sale of Porsche sales.



Indirect inference
Method of...


> Half of papers published in top five are crap.



Success in PhD is understanding your comparative advantages.
What fields do you put?
If you write econometrics, it's fair game for schools to bring in econometrics people to talk to you.
You need one very good job market paper.



Public data on lottery winners. What happens to the neighbor.
QJE
Tests benchmark effect.
Didn't have consumption data, but did have bankruptcies.
If your neighbor wins the lottery, you are more likely to go bacnkrupt.


