---
title: Mahdi Data Economy
categories: class
tags:
  - AI
  - business
---

## Motivation

1. Market Concentration is up.
2. Labor share is down.
3. Business dynamism is down.
4. Value of data is large and rising.
    - Values of data rose 33%. Labor share in knowledge work feel from 44% to 27% 2015-2018
    - Value of sweat equity is high.

## Narrative

- AI improves data
- firms can target consumer taste
- high return to customer data
- owner owns the data
- so labor contributes to smaller portion of output.
- Examples:
    - Netflix predicts what movies people would watch, more effectively contracts with film companies
    - Samsung or Apple chooses software and hardware based on customer feedback
    - Amazon supplies products and services and prioritizes based on AI analysis of customer activity.
        - (Amazon was caught showing different price based to different people)


Fatihnote: be specific about the scope of question.  For market concentration, specific to some industries.
Data growing in tech, intersection of tech and retail.
But what about mining, utilities, and construction? 
Can also use same cross-sector data to test the model.

Fatihnote: old economy (makin stuff) vs new economy (services and finance)

Fatihnote: most interesting open area is increasing inequality among firms.
Rising concentration.
Leaders in productivity. Gap has been growing.
Median markup has been flat. Average markup without weighting firms is declining. Sales weighted markup is rising. So markup rising among specific large firms.

Fatihnote: "The first moment is done. Now we are looking at the second moment."

Big fight betwen facebook and apple. BC Apple changed privacy rules.Facebook makes billions every quarter from their surveillance data.
Consulting companies are good at getting this data.
Worldbank, OECD, Kinsey? reports on this data?

### Papers
- Akcigit Ates 2020
- Sampson 2016
- Zhang 2020
-Bhandari McGrattan 2020
- Bornstein 2018

fatihnote: [safegraph](https://www.safegraph.com/covid-19-data-consortium) got access to google data to track foot traffic, even at the level of where are people inside a specific costo. Give to researchers.

fatihnote: as graduates students, one of your contributions will be to know something better than anyone else. Get your own numbers.

## Mahdi's model

Consumer has CES preferences, weighted by accuracy of firm's predictions

Firms use AI to improve accuracy of predictions on consumer's preferences.

fatihnote: Walmart bought jet.com for a billion dollars. With all of its might and power, Walmart still found it easier to buy the AI from superstars.
Shortage of bigdata people.
That's how we write good papers. 
The thoughtfulness put into the model. When people hear it, they say "yes, that's the important pieces"
Could look at resume tags (python, data science) vs income.
Papers that do well are written by people who are very thoughtful about the issue.
Lots of people concerned about why 80% of firms are laggging behind.


---

Before walmart: Go to target, buy a pair of jeans. They don't know how many jeans they have in the store. Either run out of stock or keep giant inventories.

What walmart did: You go, buy jeans, scan them, the computer updates. With less wasted warehouse space, they become slimmer.

Toyota same story. Instead of keeping a month's worth of cars ready to sell. Nowadays, the big Volkswagon factory in germany can only operate 1 hour without continual inputs. The trucks stop coming in, and they can't keep making stuff for the rest of the day.

Top tier companies:
- Apple 5 years ago
- Costco
    - about half of the items are swapped out every week
- Trader Joes
- ?

fatihnote: don't try solving model until you spend a month polishing it up.
Rob schimer, lucas, acemoglu all good at writing equations to capture what they want to capture.
Read papers to learn a bunch of modelling tricks and ideas.


---

Fatih recommends Fotran over C. That's what other researchers use, so that's what gets updated with the latest goodness for research. Lots of Fortran packages updated for parallelization while equivalent C packages have not.

matched CPS



