---
title: Fatih trends 2021
categories: talk
tags:
  - advice
  - trends
  - seminar
  - labor
---

## General Advice

We don't want to get lost, but should also not feel guilty. Need advisors to keep you on track.

Note to self: need to talk to Fatih about it, but social anxiety.

> A lot of papers that launched my career are complete accidents. 

Fatih got into big data when he went to China for econometrics society. Went to a talk on a whim. Had sudden epiphany that one of the ingredients they were adding to the model wasn't necessarily true. "Is income risk really going down?" 

Story to tell to Fatih: Rahman's advice is to work hard. I feel like I'm just not clever enough for micro theory stuff. Social anxiety back in full force.

Learning on networks. Random search model for learning.

---

## Newer Ongoing trends

1. Labor share has become volatile 1970-2000, downward trend since 2000. 75% of decline happened around 2000
    - Capital share also went down. Tax share up a tiny bit. Pure profit share went up significantly. Capital share goes to investors. The profit margins left for apple. That's where the money is going. **Eggeertsson Robbins Wold 2018**. Need to understand this difference more.
    - Intel used to have 90% profit margin due to monopoly effect. 
    - Microsoft used to have 50% profit. It's software. Easy to copy.
    - Rise of the machines?
      - Autor et al says Yes.
      - Fatih says probably, part of it.
      - Larger firms also use more capital because labor overhead shrinks in *relative* size.
      - Or maybe it's an accounting change. If Ford buys tires from China instead of making it themselves, then that decreases labor share, but not really.
        - Over past 30 years, global supply chains have become longer.
    - Declining Labor share or "payroll share"? 
      - When subcontracting food service or cleaning, the contractors pay something like 30% less.
      - Goldman Sachs used to pay $100k per janitor, and moved to subcontracting.
      - But also these temp jobs have lower job security. How does this parse with decreased labor flows?
      - Role of gig economy? Seems too recent.
      - Decline of unions?
2. Labor market flows moderated (E to U, across firms, across industries)
3. concentration in production
    - Rising Concentration by Industry (Autor et al) shows that large firms (top 4 and top 20) have a rising portion of both sales/value-added and employment. In manufacturing, top firms increasing sales share but not employment share. Similar pattern in services and finance. 
    - Andrews et al, Rising Global Concentration compares top 5% firms to the rest. From 2000-2013, most firms pretty flat in terms of productivity, while top firms growing significantly in terms of productivity.
    - Furman-Orzag 2016 says Return on Capital (profits / investment) of 90th percentile firm grown much more. But what is "goodwill" in this paper? Goodwill affects the result significantly.
    - Profits are at an all time high over the past few decades, but these profits are concentrated among big tech, fintech, and pharmaceuticals. Globalization related. Top firms are persistant.
    - Comin Philippon 2006 has some mostly incorrect conclusions, but there is a correct bit wherein persistance of public firm labor productivity rankings has gone down. But Fatih says other work he has seen shows high persistance among the top.
4. Outsourcing has gone up. How much outsourcing in US economy? *We don't really know the answer.* Firms don't hire their own drivers and cleaners and security anymore. They subcontract them from another firm that specializes in subcontracting that thing.
    - Manufacturing declined from 40% 50s to 8% today. But how much of this is because "manufacturing"
    - Ford used to own rubber tree plantations in S America, but now they buy from other companies.
    - Economist at USC has data from BLS about survey of firms along these lines.
    - Paper about ... 
    - Ask people to be self employed instead of hiring them. 
      - In Europe, non-wage cost of employee is very very high.
      - If you fire somebody, it has to be for a cause.
      - fluctuations in demand more easily accomodated. Sometimes a worker might need to work 70 hours a week, and then not work for a month at a time.
      - Fatih shares example of coffee shop with 20 baristas, none of which are actually the shop's employees. IE smoothing idiosyncratic shocks.
      - 
5. Some evidence the investment rate has fallen.
    - Reallocation to intangible capital? Very difficult way to measure it.
    - BEA's measures of intangible capital aren't big enough to explain this trend. But Fatih is skeptical about this measure. 
    - BEA wasn't including intangibles in their investment until 2013. Things like advertising, building brand, etc. were viewed as intermediate good instead of investment.
    - If you can build a billion dollar factory in the US or the exact same factory across the border for 500 million, has investment really gone down by half.
6. Gig economy seems to be taking off.
    - Walmart used to be largest with 1 million. Uber now has 6 million globally.
    - Connected to point 4 and 2? Gig economy taking off because of inflexibility otherwise.
    - Katz and Krueger have papers about this.
    - How is covid going to affect the gig economy?

Before great recession, biggest complaint was how much work was dedicated to Shymer's puzzle. How much is unemployment fluctuating?
Median unemployment duration like 3 months. 
Can't write a model where that causes major welfare losses.
"You want to understand unemployment. Look at the unemployment among Italian youth."

Boom in real estate and interior decorating because people are spending more time at home and want better homes.

### SuperStar Firms in Recent Trends

- Large firms are large and getting larger.
- Most superstars are multinational enterprises (MNEs)
- MNEs shift a lot of operations abroad for tax reasons
  - But also bc markets like china are the biggest in the world. If you can sell them stuff for cheap that they couldn't previously afford, that's a huge source of revenue.
  - This makes concentration even more dramatic because the increasing manufacturing slaes concetration is only looking at a third of Apple's sales. (BEA has secret dataset on Apple's value added in each country they operate in.)
- many key stats computed using only domesti data. ???
- Which has the potential to distort trends.
- Top 1% of firms have grown. But top 0.1% of firms haven't grown as much
- 4500 parent companies, stable since 1980s, Large expansion globally.
  - These 4500 firms contribute 27% of US value added ($3.3trillion). Abroad: $1.4trillion
  - Employ 23M workers, foreign affiliates employ 11M. 
    - Growth from 1982 to 2008, not including outsourcing: domestic 12%, foreign 80%.
    - Media accounts that Apple has 700k employees in China, but these are FoxConn employees, not Apple employees, so don't show up in numbers
- Exorbitant privalege. US assets held abroad vs. foreign assets in the US. about 25 trillion in either case; US assets a bit less. But looking at income flows, US investors abroad is several points higher income than foreign investors in US. **Big Puzzle** But most of it is accounted for by mismeasurement issues which don't take into account these large US MNEs
- USDIA income grrrew as % of economy:
  - 1973-1993 average: 12.4% of US corporate profits.
  - 2012: 28.1% of corporate profits.
  - In other words, people cheat. US has high corporate tax, so they need their profits to happen elsewhere.
  - See Series of papers from Hines and Rice 94 QJE
    - Regressing taxes declared in a country on local labor, capital, and tax rates, the coef on tax rate is -3 to -4. This is high elasticity, where a 1pp higher tax rate in country *i* reduces reported profits in that country by 3-4pp.
    - Oversaving of US coroporate sector. Corporate savings been growing quite a bit. 2.5 trillion dollars. Macro had all sorts of complicated explanations, but tax literature had the answer.
    - Management was worried about bringing that money back and being charged with securities fraud.
    - Should maybe instead be regressed on *difference* between home and foreign. That's been done.
    - Is this something anyone can do or is there a ciritical size before this can be done?
  - Example: when Apple makes profit on iphone manufacturing (bout 500 per phone), where is that profit declared? Until recently, in Bermuda. But nowadays in Ireland. Bc US has 35% corporate income, whereas Bermuda has 0%. 
    - If you want to bring that money back to US, it will get taxed eventually, but companies are smart. They wair until a tax holiday is declared.
    - How do they do this? Well, that return is from IP, and that's the magic of intangible capital. Easy to sell a patent to Bermuda or Ireland.
- Causes of this: IRS changes in the 90s
- The rise of MNEs could affect
  - trend in labor share (1pp more drop)
  - rise in concentration?
  - investment trends?
  - share of profits to private vs public firms (large effect)

#### Laws of Economics

We don't really have laws like physics does. 

The labor share was like a law for a century, but now that's changed. 

But one law that still stands is the **Pareto distribution of firm size**. The regression of $$\ln ( numberFirms)$$ on $$\ln(numberEmployees)$$, then $$R^2$$ is 0.9999. Very consistently fat tailed distribution for firm size. In 2011, $$\alpha=1.0495$$

City size distribution and income shock distribution have similar patterns. **Ball and bin?**



---

## Takeaways Questions and Ideas

- Can I connect the rise in gig economy to decreased flexibility of other firms, in terms of concetration and labor flows. Is it the same phenomenon that causes outsourcing.
  - Regulatory barriers to new large firms? Can mom and pop tax evade in Bermuda like big Apple does? Network effects in terms of advertising creating snowball in outsourcing and gig economy?
- Concentration related to barrier to entry of tax evasion?
- Can the law of firm size be generated by purely random processes?
  - Firm grows or shrinks proportional to firm size?
- Does the increase of outsourcing account for the decrease in labor flows and increase in concentration.


TODO: lookup what site has database of firms sorted by industry

- https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/aces/information/iccl.html
- https://www.naics.com/company-profile-page/?co=9174
- https://www.naics.com/company-profile-page/?co=13397
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_American_Industry_Classification_System


- When it comes to the large savings of MNEs motivated by tax evasion:
  - Does this extra savings get reinvested into the firm's growth, or does it just sit around in a Scrooge McDuck vault in Bermuda?
  - How difficult is it to avoid corporate income tax in this way? Is it something a mom and pop shop could do, or is it really only possible for the largest of firms?
  - Could part of the trend of increasing concentration be explained by firms above a certain size facing de facto different tax schedules that more incentivize long-term growth?
- How much of the decrease in labor flows is because of outsourcing, subcontracting, etc?
  - Example 1: I'm a janitor. I clean the offices for Sprint. I lose my job because T-Mobile buys Sprint and relocates some of the admin services to a different city. A few weeks later, I find a new job cleaning offices for Garmin, a GPS manufacturer. 
  - Example 2: I'm a janitor who works for a temp agency. They assign me to clean some offices for Sprint, but after those services are no longer needed, I'm assigned to clean for Garmin.
  - In either example, the actual work I'm doing is the same. But in example 1: I move from employed to unemployed and back again, I move between firms, and I move from the information industry to the manufacturing industry. In example 2, none of these flows occur.



Vitamin D and Qanon